Annotation guidelines used for Semeval task 10 -
  “Linking Events and Their Participants in
                  Discourse ”
                             Josef Ruppenhofer
                              January 22, 2010


1     Coreference annotations
1.1    The purpose of coreference annotations
Our coreference annotations are intended only as a tool for evaluating NI linking.
We allow NIs to be linked to any mention of the relevant referent rather than
only to the most recent one, or to the most prominent one in the proximal prior
context. In fact, an NI could be linked to a mention later in the discourse as
long as that mention has the correct referent.

1.2    Protocol
We generally follow the format used in the MUC-7 shared task (http://www.
itl.nist.gov/iad/894.02/related_projects/muc/proceedings/co_task.html).
We do, however, deviate from MUC-7 in some respects.
    • One major difference is that in some cases we use non-nominal XPs as
      antecedents. For instance, when the demonstrative pronoun ”that” co-
      refers with a prior sentence, as in ”I didn’t know that!”, we label co-
      reference between ’that’ and the relevant sentence.
    • Another more minor difference is that we only annotate whole phrases
      while MUC annotates minimal and maximal annotation spans for the
      head and the maximal NP that denote the referent. [By whole phrases we
      refer to whole phrases according to human understanding. The nodes we
      label don’t need to cover complete, single phrases in the imperfect syntax
      trees that we use.]
    • MUC also marks all NPs of certain morphosyntactic types as ’markables’
      even if later they do not participate in a coreference chain. We don’t mark
      any NPs or other phrases that are not part of a coreference chain.



                                        1
It should be pointed out that MUC coreference is extensionsally oriented. As
an example consider that in MUC, two markables should be recorded as coref-
erential if the text asserts them to be coreferential at ANY TIME. Thus,
(1)         Henry Higgins, who was formerly sales director for Sudsy Soaps, be-
            came president of Dreamy Detergents
      should be annotated as
(2)         <COREF ID="1" MIN="Henry Higgins">Henry Higgins, who was
            formerly <COREF ID="2" MIN="director" REF="1" TYPE="IDENT">
            sales director for Sudsy Soaps,</COREF></COREF> became
            <COREF ID="3" MIN="president" REF="1" TYPE="IDENT">
            president of Dreamy Detergents$<$/COREF$>$
In our data, we have some cases where the true identities of some characters are
revealed later in the story, e.g. the character of Henderson is revealed to really
be Murillo, The Tiger of San Pedro. In this case, we formed one big coreference
chain, even though intensionally these are different referents.


2       Frame semantic annotations
2.1      Frame inventory
Our frame semantic annotations reflect the state of FrameNet in release 1.4
alpha, which is a special release for use by Semeval task-10 participants. It will
be available either (or both) from the main Semeval page or from the Task-10
home page.

2.2      Annotation style
We generally follow FrameNet’s annotation policies and style. However, the
format of our frame semantic annotations is somewhat different from those
produced by FrameNet. The reason for this is that our annotation tool, Salto,
doesn’t use layers as FrameNet’s Desktop does. As a result:
      • We treat relativization as a separate frame that is evoked by the relativizer.
        Note that for frames inside the relative clauses we only mark the relativizer
        as a frame element but not the antecedent. (FrameNet marks the relative
        word and the antecedent phrase on the so-called Other layer that comes
        with the annotation set of the target of which the relativizer is a syntactic
        argument.)
      • We let Support verbs and prepositions evoke a Support frame in which
        only one FE occurs for the ”Supported” XP. (In FrameNet annotations,
        Support is labeled on the so-called part-of-speech specific layer of targets.)
      • There also is no way of annotating frame elements on a second FE-layer,
        which FrameNet does on some occasions.


                                           2
3       Null instantiation annotation
We are interested in accounting for how core Frame Elements that are not
expressed overtly have to be understood. The idea of null instantiation that we
use is the same as the one that is used in FrameNet. We assume that the two
main dimensions for understanding null instantiations are
      • the kind of linguistic entity that enables (”licenses”) the omission and
      • the kind of interpretation that the unexpressed argument receives
Along the first dimension we distinguish between omissions licensed by lexical
items (that is, by specific word senses) and omissions licensed by syntactic con-
structions. Along the second dimension, we distinguish between omissions that
required a definite (anaphoric or deictic) interpretation and ones that allow an
indefinite (existential) interpretation. (More on this distinction follows below)

3.1      Licensors
As pointed out, one type of omission is licensed by specific word senses. For
instance, pass can omit its object under definite interpretation when it is used
in the sense of succeeding at an exam but not when it expresses transfer of
physical possession:

(3)           I barely passed ∅. [my exam]
(4)           #He passed me ∅ for the soup. [the salt]

   The other type of omissions is licensed by specific constructions. Since no
exhaustive list of NI-licensing constructions is available, annotators have to be
ready to discover and judge novel cases. However, there are some relatively
well-known constructions that license null-instantiation and we give a list of
them below, specifying the argument whose omission they enable and the inter-
pretation type of that argument.
   In deciding whether a particular omission is licensed by a lexical item or a
construction one can use the following criteria:

      • If one can replace the predicate that is missing an argument with others
        that are semantically unrelated, then the omission is most likely construc-
        tional. An example are the missing subjects of imperatives.

        (5)          ∅ {Steal/find/buy/return/destroy} the watch by tomorrow!

      • If the omissibility disappears when you change use the predicate in differ-
        ent syntactic constructions, then the omission is probably constructionally
        licensed. If it is preserved, the omission is most likely lexically licensed.
           – Constructional licensor passive
               (6)       My car was stolen ∅ last night.


                                             3
               (7)         #∅ stole my car last night.
          – Lexical licensor know
               (8)         Did he know ∅? (Question)
               (9)         I did not know ∅. (Statement)
               (10)        So I think in order to know ∅, you must go there and see if
                           it’s a good or bad country. (Non-finite purpose clause)

3.1.1     List of some well-known NI-licensing constructions
The list below is incomplete but it contains the most well-known cases of null
instantiation licensed by constructions.

   • Agent of Passives : existential
        (11)          My uncle was robbed ∅ on that street last night.
   • Addressee (intended Agent) of an Imperative : anaphoric
        (12)          ∅ Please take the trash out.

   • Object omission of Instructional imperatives (e.g. in recipes) : deic-
     tic/anaphoric
        (13)          Season ∅ to taste and serve ∅
   • Subjects of product label statements : deictic/anaphoric

        (14)          ∅ Contains alcohol [e.g. on a bottle of medicine]
   • Various kinds of roles and grammatical functions in telegraphic style (as
     used e.g. in news headlines)
        (15)          Dravid says ∅ has nothing to prove after ODI recall

   • Objects in speech reporting clauses expressing Judgment : anaphoric
        (16)          ”Stop being melodramatic. Its only one of my fifth year stu-
                      dents,” she scolded ∅, settling herself in her comfortable, if rather
                      mucky chair.

   • Objects of experiential perfects : existential
        (17)          Have you ever stolen ∅ before? If so what? Do you think stealing
                      is a serious crime?
   • Objects of generic/habitual clauses : existential

        (18)          Lions kill ∅ at night.

   • Objects of verbs appearing in the away-construction : existential


                                               4
      (19)      Do you seriously think that there has been any election in this
                century where both political machines have not been defrauding
                ∅ away as hard as possible?
   • Objects of the Verb one’s way-construction : existential
      (20)      This is the story of Major Benson Winifred Payne, a Marine
                Corp Force Reconnaissance officer who has killed ∅ his way out
                of a job.

3.2    Interpretation type
While our annotations also include a classification of an NI instance according to
the type of licensor, lexical or constructional, the main piece of information we
need for Semeval is the interpretation type. We assume that a binary distinc-
tion between anaphoric/deictic intepretation on the one hand and existential
interpretation on the other hand is all that we need.
    The two kinds of null instantiation involve different processes of recovering
the unrealized argument. In cases of indefinite/existential omission, there need
not be any overt mention of an indefinite NP in the linguistic context nor does
there have to be a referent of the kind denoted by the omitted argument in
the physical discourse setting. However, it seems to be a requirement for cases
of definite (anaphoric or deictic) omissions that either a specic entity has been
mentioned or it is inferable from prior discourse context or that one is present
in the physical discourse setting. These properties correlate with the differential
felicitousness of the two types of omission in various discourse contexts.

   • With indefinite null instantiation, both speaker and hearer can claim ig-
     norance of the exact identity of the referent; not so in the case of definite
     null instantiation.
      (21)      #Kim donated $20 ∅ but I wonder who she gave it to. (DNI)
      (22)      Kim was reading ∅ but I don’t know what he was reading. (INI)
   • In contexts of definite omission, a definite pronoun can usually substitute
     for the omission but not in the case of indefinite omission. Complemen-
     tarily, in contexts of indefinite omission, an indefinite pronoun can usually
     substitute for the omission but not in the case of definite omission.
      (23)      Did the Red Cross call you about a donation?-Yes, and I con-
                tributed $20 to them/#somebody. (DNI)
      (24)      Are you hungry?-No, I’ve already eaten #it/something. (INI)
   • When an INI-verb heads a negated clause, existence of a referent for the
     null instantiated argument is not entailed. By contrast, in the case of DNI
     verbs, the null-instantiated argument is entailed to have a referent.
      (25)      I’m not cooking ∅. Do you see any food around here? (INI)


                                        5
      (26)     I did’t know ∅. #Is there anything to know? (DNI)
   • A DNI omission cannot normally occur at the beginning of a discourse,
     unless speaker and hearer are physically in the context of the referent (28),
     or unless they have enough common ground to be able to pick up on an
     earlier conversation (29).
      (27)     Hello Sir, may I ask you something? #Did Mrs Clinton get
               revenge? [asked of an unfamiliar person in the street] (DNI)
      (28)     Please come in ∅! [the apartment where the speaker is receiving
               the hearer] (DNI)
      (29)     So did you find out? [the answer to the question we discussed
               earlier] (DNI)
      For INI omissions, it is not a problem to occur at the beginning of a
      discourse.

        – I’ve been mugged ∅! Please, sir, call the police. [walking up to
          stranger in the street] (INI)
        – John can’t come to the phone now, he’s busy reading ∅. [reply to
          caller inquiring for fellow resident of speaker] (INI)

3.3    How to tell that something is missing
In FrameNet’s frames, the core Frame elements also can have certain relations
to each other, so that they are not completely independent. This also affects
the need for NI resolution. There are 3 types of relations:

   • CoreSet: the relation between a set of FEs of which either one or more
     must be expressed overtly, or of which one must be annotated as NI. The
     idea is that the FEs in the group are pragmatically equivalent and at least
     one of them is needed to form a felicitous utterance. For instance, in the
     Attempt suasion frame, the FEs Speaker and Medium form a CoreSet.

      (30)     [Dennis Rodman Speaker] encourages moderation in all things.
      (31)     [This book Medium] encourages moderation in all things.
      (32)     [In is book Medium], [Dennis Rodman Speaker] encourages
               moderation in all things.
      If none of the elements in a CoreSet is expressed overtly, then the FE that
      makes most sense in the context ought to be annotated. For instance, in
      (33), one should annotate Medium as INI rather than Speaker since only
      the article is mentioned in the context.

      (33)     Did you read this article? People are strongly encouraged to
               save more even though that will worsen the recession!


                                        6
   • Excludes: a symmetric relation between two elements that says that
     they cannot be co-present. For instance, in the Similarity frame, the
     FE Entities excludes the FE Entity 1 and Entity 2. Conversely, each of
     Entity 1 and Entity 2 also excludes Entities.

       (34)     [My car Entity 1] is similar [to his Entity 2].
       (35)     [The two cars Entities] are similar.

       Now, when Entities is overtly instantiated, there is no need to provide a
       NI annotation for Entity 1 and Entity 2. And conversely, when one or
       both of Entity 1 and Entity 2 is instantiated, then there is no need to
       provide an NI-annotation for Entities.
   • Requires: if element A requires element B and if A is present, then
     element B must be either realized overtly or annotated as NI. The converse
     is not true unless also explicitly stated: element B may occur without
     element A.
       As an example, consider the Personal relationship frame’s elements Partner 1
       and Partner 2 . Both of them stand in an Excludes relationship to Part-
       ners. But additionally, they stand in a Requires relationship to each other.
       So in a sentence like 36, Partner 1 would be annotated directly on the tar-
       get word and Partner 2 would be marked as DNI.

       (36)     You should meet the husband!

Note that these relations are specified in the frame relations file (frRelation.xml)
of the FN distribution. Technically, they are treated as part of a frame-to-frame
relation as e.g. in the case of Inheritance. In the case of CoreSet, Requires, and
Excludes, the parent and child frames of the relation just happen to be the same
frame.
    Finally, some lexical units are said to incorporate core Frame Elements.
For instance, the Placing frame contains verbs like box and archive, which, unlike
put or place, provide some idea of what kind of place the Goal location is.
(37)      Mike, think about it - this will be the last digest you’ll need to archive!
   If the Goal location of a verb like box is unexpressed, there is no need
to annotate INI. The information that a particular lexical unit incorporates
a particular FE is specified in the lu-annotation files (to be found under the
luXML directory).

3.4     How the annotation is carried out
The null instantiation annotation consists of two steps: the omissions are clas-
sified in terms of their properties and they are linked to their antecedents, if
that is possible.
     The classification of the omissions is carried out by setting so-called flags on
frame elements. The meanings of the main flags are:

                                         7
DNI The FE is not realized as an overt syntactic dependent of the predicate
    evoking its frame instance. The referent is understood anaphorically or
    deictically.
INI The FE is not realized as an overt syntactic dependent of the predicate
    evoking its frame instance. The referent is understood existentially.
Lexical licensor The omission of the FE is made possible by the idiosyncratic
     meaning of the frame evoking element.
Constructioal licensor The omission of the FE is made possible by the syn-
    tactic constructions in the context or by the genre of the text.

    Additionally, there are uncertainty flags that allow the annotators to note
that they are not sure about the particular value they chose for the interpre-
tation (DNI v. INI) or the licensor (lexical v. constructional) annotation.
Additionally, in those cases where a DNI could be linked to an overt antecedent
but the annotator is unsure that the antecedent is right, they can also set an
“Uncertain antecedent” flag.
Annotators can get some help in figuring out if their frame and NI annotations
are complete and consistent. After having annotated the overt FEs, they can
run a checker script that reports, for instance, whether the constraints about
CoreSets, Excludes, Requires relations between FEs have been observed or not.
E.g. if none of the elements of a CoreSet are overtly realized, they are reminded
that they need to annotate at least one of them as NI. The checker script also
outputs all the coreference chains in the text to give the annotators a better
overview of which mentions they have linked together in a chain.
Finally, multiple annotators carry out the annotation of both training (2) and
test data (3). The final versions of both data sets are produced by merging and
adjudicating the individual annotations.

3.5    Comparison to NI annotations in FrameNet
Note that our and the FrameNet NI annotations are not completely comparable
because FrameNet collapses one of the two distinctions. In particular, we retain
the distinction between definite/anaphoric and indefinite/existential interpreta-
tion type also for those null instantiations that are enabled by particular syntac-
tic constructions, while FrameNet simply labels all null instantiations licensed by
a syntactic constructions as CNI (”constructional null instantiation”), regard-
less of what the interpretation type is. Accordingly, the FrameNet data does
not reveal that the constructionally omitted agent of a passive is existentially
interpreted, while the intended Agent of an imperative has an anaphoric/deictic
interpretation.




                                        8
